Tidepool Draft Response to the Helmsley Charitable Trust Automated Insulin Delivery Initiative Letter of Inquiry
Due: January 15, 2014
http://helmsleytrust.org/program-areas/health-medical-research/type-1-diabetes/automated-insulin-delivery-initiative

This document also exists here as a google doc:
https://docs.google.com/a/tidepool.org/document/d/1VJ4fjeWUDDv4nW-xhjLTUlPtd5jl3jcos7_kHmwplkQ/edit#
	
Please provide the mission and a brief history of your organization's work.
(250 word maximum)

Tidepool’s non-profit mission is to reduce the burden for people living with type 1 diabetes. We are creating an open source, open data platform and elegant, intuitive applications that are a delight to use. The source code for our efforts is freely available and vendor-neutral, accelerating progress towards commercialization of closed-loop systems.

Our team is composed of experienced Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, developers and designers, all with a personal connection to T1D. We are building great software and giving it away.

The Tidepool Platform makes it easier to gather data from devices and use it in meaningful ways. The platform is based around modern, secure cloud development practices such as RESTful APIs, a no-SQL event-based database, data authentication, validation and provenance, and an automated test compliance suite.

Tidepool’s applications are useful to patients, parents, researchers and caregivers. Our first application, blip, makes it easier to gather data from any source, even from different vendors, and view it in one place to gain actionable insights. Our second application, Nutshell, makes it easy to keep track of meals, insulin doses and device data, making future dosing decisions easier and more accurate.

Tidepool was established in 2012 as “GreenDot Diabetes,” a collaboration between Silicon Valley entrepreneurs with a personal connection to T1D and UCSF’s Madison Clinic for Pediatric Diabetes. In 2013, Tidepool hired 11 employees, seven of whom have T1D and two of whom have family members with T1D; our mission is deeply personal. 


Project Title
(20 words or less)
Tidepool: Reducing the burden of type 1 diabetes with an open source, open data platform and better apps.

Total Amount Request
$4.0M

Term
In whole months (36 max)
24 months

Year 1 Amount Requested
$2.0M

Year 2 Amount Requested
$2.0M

Year 3 Amount Requested
$0M

Financial Officer Information
Full Name of Financial Officer
Sirk Roh, Early Growth Financial Services

Briefly State the Goal, Strategy, and Outcome of the Proposal
(each three separately, with once sentence of 50 words or less each)

Goal (One sentence, 50 words or less):

Tidepool’s goal is to develop and deliver all of the cloud, mobile and web software necessary to deliver a commercial closed-loop system, including working arm-in-arm with device makers to see their devices through pre-market approval and post-market efficacy studies.


Strategy (One sentence, 50 words or less):

Tidepool’s strategy is to build a secure, open platform and applications using modern technology and lean, agile development practices.


Outcome (One sentence, 50 words or less):

Tidepool’s device-agnostic cloud and AIDI applications enable pre-market research and trials and provide the needed infrastructure for post-market efficacy studies, reducing the software development requirements for device makers so they can focus on control algorithms, mechanical and industrial design, and manufacturing.

Provide a Lay Summary of the Proposal that Summarizes the Essential Elements of the Proposal:

Lay Summary
Please summarize all essential elements of the proposal, including: stating the desired outcomes, identifying collaborators; outlining strategy. (500 words or less)


Tidepool is an open source, not-for-profit entity. Open source development allows us to develop the most secure software possible also also provide source code at no cost. Being a non-profit allows us to be vendor-neutral and help the entire industry accelerate the development and commercialization of closed-loop systems.

Our open data platform will be compatible with a broad range of diabetes devices and applications. The platform features a modern architecture with encrypted, validated data, secure authentication, and RESTful APIs. We will implement all available diabetes device standards [1] and the platform will be HIPAA-compliant. Source code will be freely available to those that wish to use it. Tidepool will also provide hosted versions of our back-end and applications for those device makers seeking an expeditious path to market. We will establish a Master File with the FDA and other regulatory bodies and will work with project sponsors to support our code through the regulatory process. The Tidepool Platform will include a robust “compliance test suite” to assist in regulatory processes.

Tidepool’s applications exemplify usability, actionability, and overall design. In 2013, Tidepool demonstrated the near-term possibilities of device interoperability and cloud connectivity with our first two applications, “blip” and “Nutshell.” These examples of smart apps galvanized widespread support from the diabetes community. [2][3][4][5]

In 2014, Tidepool will begin development on additional applications that enable closed-loop trials, commercialization and post-market efficacy analysis. These applications include: remote telemetry/monitoring (e.g. for camp studies and home monitoring), a research data interface, and a mobile notification/messaging application.

Tidepool is actively collaborating with the Madison Clinic for Pediatric Diabetes at UCSF, led by Tidepool’s lead medical advisor Dr. Saleh Adi, and supported by the UCSF Center for Digital Health Innovation. This collaboration will execute Tidepool’s first IRB-approved pilot study measuring the usability of “blip.” Tidepool is also in discussion and pre-planning stages with other centers including Stanford and the Joslin Diabetes Center.

Additionally, Tidepool intends to support and collaborate with an emerging consortium of closed-loop system development teams, including UVA, OHSU and Stanford. We also are extremely supportive of the effort of BU AP team. Our cloud platform, visualization, messaging, notification and telemetry systems will be valuable to all closed-loop efforts.

Finally, we believe that the Tidepool platform will be of great value to the T1DExchange and other research teams. The Tidepool platform gathers event-based data from diabetes and other devices (e.g. fitness trackers), enabled advanced queries and research.

Near-term, our desired outcome is to provide the platform and applications necessary to expedite closed-loop development and research. We will build the backend platform, device connectivity, and mobile/web applications that everyone can use, allowing other teams to focus their efforts on pump mechanical and industrial design and control algorithms.

Our ultimate goal is to accelerate the commercialization of a cloud-connected closed-loop system by building great software that the industry can use.

[1] Cafazzo, Joseph A. et al. “Advancement of the Artificial Pancreas through the Development of Interoperability Standards,” Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology: Volume 7, Issue 4. July 2013.
[2] Jiangfeng Fei via DiabetesMine. “JDRF: Patient Needs Must Drive T1 Diabetes Innovation” Dec 9, 2013.
[3] Hodge, Mike. “Wanted in a Nutshell: Hassle-Free Diabetes Tech,” DiabetesMine.com. Dec 6, 2013.
[4] Aprigliano, Christel Marchand. “Swept Away by Tidepool,” ThePerfectD.com. Dec 5, 2013.
[5] Walsh, John & Ruth Roberts. “Tidepool - Acquiring, Storing, and Opening Data for Improved Diabetes Care”, Diabetesnet.com. 2013.



Scientific Proposal
Please explain:
How this project is designed to address the objective of the Automated Insulin Delivery Initiative RFP
Summarize all research and development activities required to meet the objective
Provide a clear product description and if necessary how the device functionality achieves the objectives of the Automated Insulin Delivery Initiative RFP.
(1,000 words or less)


The Tidepool Platform

The Tidepool Platform encompasses both cloud- and client-side software. It provides the infrastructure needed for the next generation of smart, connected diabetes devices and closed loop applications.

Core components of the Tidepool Platform include:
Secure and HIPAA-compliant; data is always encrypted, both at rest and during transport, using industry-standard techniques.
Messaging and Notification APIs for interfacing with mobile applications, EHR/EMR systems, and telemetry systems.
Data Authentication, Validation and Provenance pipeline; all data and data transformations are maintained using industry-standard cryptographic digital signatures, allowing the provenance of data to be traceable back to their sources.
Entirely secure, authenticated, RESTful API endpoints.
Device-agnostic, client-side (mobile and web) APIs for accessing device data.
Anonymized database of donated, contextualized diabetes data that enables researchers to query and access data easily from any device individually or in aggregate form.
Easier data downloading from device to cloud and improved accessibility to this data for patients, providers, and application developers.
An extensive, robust compliance test suite

The attached “Tidepool platform diagram” shows the overall architecture of the Tidepool Platform.

[Platform diagram]
Accelerating Delivery of the Closed-loop systems

Artificial Pancreas systems will extend beyond the hardware (pump and CGM) and control algorithms. Tidepool is building the middleware and cloud infrastructure that will enable device manufacturers to focus on industrial and mechanical design and researchers to focus on designing control algorithms. 

The Tidepool platform provides commercially viable software expediting development and commercialization of closed-loop systems. Tidepool will establish a Master File with the FDA, and supply the following components and services to any future closed-loop study:
Design-focused mobile UI for patient/controller interaction
“Camp study” and “home use” telemetry systems providing study coordinators with real-time status updates and critical alerts
Cloud-based data storage for post-facto analysis of efficacy
Design-focused web and mobile interfaces for remote monitoring and intervention by parents, caretakers, or providers

The attached “artificial pancreas ecosystem” diagrams shows elements that Tidepool will provide as part of automated insulin (and other hormone) delivery systems.

[Artificial pancreas diagram.]

Regulatory Strategy
Tidepool has chosen to engage with the FDA early and often while architecting our platform and services. Through this process, we garnered input from FDA reviewers, analysts, and policy advisors on how Tidepool can develop the safest software that most effectively accelerates innovation across the diabetes industry. Their feedback has become an integral part of Tidepool’s strategy:

All code developed by Tidepool will be freely available and in the open. It will include an automated test suite that validates proper functionality. Both the code and the test suite will be documented in an FDA Master File that can be referenced by any entity that re-uses our software.
Tidepool will also offer an optional, hosted, cloud-based backend, will be taken to the FDA. Any developer, device maker, or researcher can utilize it for their own data storage and transfer, eliminating the need to develop and manage the regulatory process for these components.
Tidepool’s development methodology and products adhere strictly to HIPAA security guidelines and Tidepool signs business associate agreements (“BAA”) with all partners, ensuring process and accountability for patient privacy.

The Tidepool Team
Tidepool is led by Silicon Valley entrepreneurs with a proven track record of delivering world-class, disruptive innovation. We represent a venn-diagram intersection of world-class developers and user interface designers:
A passion for making things better for people with Type 1 Diabetes. Seven of 11 team members have T1D. Two have family members with T1D.
Experience with modern, full-stack software development including the use of RESTful APIs.
Experience with large, successful open source projects.
A passion for great design and human factors.

For more information about the Tidepool team, please see: http://tidepool.org/team

We are also drawing upon an extended network of developers in the open source community who share our vision for an open platform that reduces the burden of diabetes.

The Tidepool Process

Tidepool is a “Lean Startup.” We are following iterative “customer development process” outlined by Steve Blank (see http://steveblank.com). Through this process Tidepool has engaged with hundreds of patients, parents, doctors, key partners and every single device maker in the US.

Tidepool is a recent graduate of the “Lean Launchpad for Health Care” program at UCSF. You can watch our presentations and read more about the process here:
http://steveblank.com/2013/12/02/when-customers-make-you-smarter/
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nFf8LvgAtRk
http://vimeo.com/81988514

Tidepool is also following the Agile software development practice known as “scrum.” This process helps us iterate quickly while keeping quality extremely high.

Together, being a “Lean Startup” and using Agile development efforts have been key to quickly generating momentum and ensuring that what we build will exceed the expectations of patients, caregivers researchers and device makers.


Attachments
100MB max per file. Certain extentions (exe, com, vbs, bat, etc) cannot be uploaded.
501(c)3 letter of determination

Tidepool filed its Form 1023 in June, 2013, but has not yet received its letter of determination. Please see: http://tidepool.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/TidepoolForm1023ConsolidatedForWeb.pdf

Audited financial statements

[from Sirk]
Tax form 990 for 2 more fiscal years (if applicable)

[2012/2013 Form 990 filing]

Organizational budget
1-paragraph biographies on Key Staff

[Pull from http://tidepool.org/team]

Project budget (please use the LOI Budget template provided on the AIDI RFP page of the Helmsley website)

[in progress]
